[MUSIC PLAYING]
>>LISA GARR: Why do some
people have a fear of success,
and others don't?
Why do some people make
money and then lose it?
Is this a matter of
cultural beliefs?
Hi.
I'm Lisa Garr.
And joining me is
neuropsychologist
Dr. Mario Martinez,
whose biocognitive theory
brings together insights
from medicine, psychology,
anthropology, and
spirituality to make
sense of these questions.
Welcome to the show.
>>MARIO MARTINEZ: Thank
you for having me.
>>LISA: So let's talk about
this psychology of abundance.
I'd love to know, what is it?
>>MARTINEZ: The best way to look
at is to start with a culture.
A culture, the way I define
it, is a collective belief
of things that are
really important in life,
like health, ethics,
aesthetics, wellness, abundance.
And without knowing
it, that culture
teaches you the
ceilings of what it
should be at a certain
age, what it shouldn't be.
And although
they'll say, well, I
want you to make as much
money as you wanted,
when you go beyond
a certain ceiling,
it's just as if you're having
some kind of an anxiety
reaction.
So you have to come back to what
is comfortable within the pale.
>>LISA: Unconsciously?
>>MARTINEZ: Yes.
>>LISA: So this is
based on the tribe.
>>MARTINEZ: On the tribe, yes.
>>LISA: They didn't
want you to leave.
They wanted you to
stay within the tribe.
>>MARTINEZ: They
want you to stay,
because the tribe wants
you to work collectively
for the tribe.
And if you leave,
you're an outlier.
Then you're no
longer doing that.
So then what they do is
they want to keep you there.
And if you return, at first,
if you return successful,
it's fine.
You're a hero.
But after a while,
then they want
to cut the hero down and
bring him down to size,
so you don't go beyond the pale.
>>LISA: Ah.
Now does this still apply, even
though cultures are so diluted
now?
>>MARTINEZ: It does, because we
have a multicultural country,
but in each family
you have a culture
that dominates a little
bit more than the other.
And that's what you assimilate.
Then, of course, you pick up
whatever you learn in school.
And so it's a combination,
but it's all cultural.
The teacher has a culture.
The doctor has a culture,
and they bring it in.
I'll give you an example.
In Bolivia, there is quite
a bit of malnutrition,
so anemia is very common.
And if you have anemia, and
you're a mestizo or white,
the mestizos, which are
half white, half Indians,
they associate themselves
or identify with the white.
And the natives are
lower in socioeconomics.
If you have anemia
and you're a native,
the shaman will call
it [NON-ENGLISH],,
which is a terminal illness.
No amount of Western
medicine will intervene.
The whites and the
mestizos, you have anemia,
you have B12 or whatever,
and you're cured.
But the interesting
thing about it is here
is socioeconomics again.
The government of
Bolivia gave the natives
a lot of land as
an agrarian reform.
And then the natives went
up from the mestizos.
The mestizos dropped.
They could no longer
identify with the whites.
And when they had anemia,
it would be [NON-ENGLISH],,
and they would die.
>>LISA: Huh.
>>MARTINEZ: So
it's very powerful
because your immune system
and your nervous system
will adhere to the social and
cultural beliefs that you have,
because when we're born,
we're designed to pick up
on what I call the cultural
elders, people that
are really important in life.
And you're hungry, and you
have a physiology of hunger.
Then you see a breast
or you see a bottle.
It's done.
So there's a physiology of
hunger, satiation of hunger.
Than later you know
that's a breast.
That's mother.
But you already
have a physiology,
and then it becomes a symbol.
And that same thing
happens with abundance.
Abundance, to a
certain level, is fine.
Then after a certain level,
intellectually, you say, no.
This is fine.
I deserve everything.
But then you start finding
ways that you're really
sabotaging yourself because of
these ceilings of abundance.
>>LISA: Is this why
if a family maybe
goes through a financial
crisis, then 30, 40 years later,
you'll mimic the same
financial crisis as an adult?
>>MARTINEZ: Yes.
Yes, exactly.
>>LISA: Even though you've
tried everything to avoid it.
>>MARTINEZ: Yes, you've
tried everything,
because intellectually
you'll say, no, no.
I'm not going to
be like my parents.
But it's built into the system.
Now there are ways of
coming out of that,
but it's built into the system.
And you'll say, I'm never
going to be like my dad.
And you're just like your dad.
>>LISA: Is this where
the fear of abundance
came from, if there
is such a thing?
>>MARTINEZ: Yes.
Let me give an example.
You see your dad trying and
trying and trying and working
hard, and he never makes it.
So in your mind, you say,
I'm going to work harder.
But the biocognition
that you have learned
is no matter how hard I try,
I'm never going to make it,
because of the model that
you learned from your dad.
So you have that, and
then you do better.
And when you do better,
something happens.
And you say, wait a
minute, not consciously.
This doesn't fit.
What's wrong with this picture?
And another thing that
happens subconsciously
is that if you do
better than your dad,
you're dishonoring your dad.
>>LISA: Oh.
>>MARTINEZ: So I've had many
patients who have that problem.
We have to work through
that, and they didn't even
know they were feeling
that way, that to do better
is to dishonor the person that
I honored and that is my hero.
>>LISA: And you
do the same thing.
You teach people how to really
look at things differently so
that you change cultural norms.
Can you give us a specific
exercise around that?
You're saying look at it.
Identify it first,
and then what?
>>MARTINEZ: Let's use
the example of abundance.
The first thing
to do is you have
to get into a relaxed
state, so that the brain
doesn't create anxiety for you.
It could be relaxation,
meditation, whatever.
Once you get to that
contemplative level,
then you do the technique.
And you stop, and you say, let's
say I'm making $20,000 a year
now.
Let's say that's what you make.
And then you say, and
I pay these bills.
I do this.
I do that.
And then you check the
body as you're doing that.
Then you go, now I'm
making $80,000 a year.
And what am I doing
with that money?
And you do the imagery.
And then you go back to the body
to see what the body is doing.
So what you're doing
is you're desensitizing
the levels of abundance that
your mind-body can accept.
It doesn't mean you're
going to go out and make it.
But what will happen is that you
will look at the opportunities
that you wouldn't look
at before, because that
was the cultural ceiling
that you created.
And you do this over and over.
And I've had many, many
patients who tell me
that they found a new job.
They started making more
money, because the perception
opened up.
So you're not
attracting anything.
It's the perception opens up.
>>LISA: OK, but what if you
are making that $20,000,
and you're living beyond your
means, like most Americans are?
And they feel
anxiety about that,
and they feel stress about that.
And so there goes
the coherent state.
There goes that
contemplative state.
And how do you get
yourself out of that?
>>MARTINEZ: Well, the next part
of that is to look at, let's
say, whatever you're making,
and you're beyond your means.
Then what are the basic
things that you really
need to make you happy?
And then that
becomes the priority,
and you begin to get rid
of all the other things,
the overreaction.
For example, you
never go shopping
when you're hungry because
you're going to buy
more food and things like that.
So this technique
will also teach you
what it is that you're doing
that it's beyond your means,
because if you, for example,
let's say you're making 20,
or you do this, and
you're making 80.
And you notice that
you're doing this.
And you go back, and you
say, well, in both cases,
I'm going beyond my means.
That's insights.
And then you go into abundance
has to be quality of life, not
accumulation.
So you change the meaning of
abundance, quality of life.
>>LISA: And so you go from
the $20,000 in your mind
to the $80,000 in
your mind, and you
become living within your means,
so that that is associated
with no anxiety, with stress
free and great relationships,
right?
That's what you do.
>>MARTINEZ: Yes, and
then one of the ways
to really figure out if
you are where you are,
I did one that I was
making $1 billion a year.
And when you go back,
you find that it doesn't
change your life very much.
Then you're on target.
>>LISA: So someone
can mimic the patterns
and you said the editors
of culture in a family.
And does that
eventually manifest?
Like, in an abundance
case, it could manifest
into a loss of finances.
In a health situation, it could
manifest into disease, right?
>>MARTINEZ: Yes, and the myth
that a family illness is just
a myth.
It's only a propensity to
be expressed with diet,
environments, and beliefs.
So you're saying, oh, everybody
in your family has diabetes.
That's it.
Well, the propensity
will be very high.
And then some reductionists
will say, well, look.
The mother has it.
The sister has it.
Well, they all eat
the same thing.
They live in the same place,
and they have the same belief
systems.
>>LISA: Right, and
it's very unconscious.
>>MARTINEZ: Very
unconscious, but then you
find an outlier in that family
who doesn't have diabetes,
and you will see
that that person is
acting differently and
living differently and not
buying into the script.
>>LISA: Outliers.
So do they really have
to go against the grain?
Or can they-- they really do.
>>MARTINEZ: Yes, you have
to go against the grain
in order to grow.
Otherwise, you'll be in the
collective mentality that's
good for the collective, but you
have to individualize yourself.
And you have to go
out and do whatever
it is that you need to do.
>>LISA: But then how do you
not sabotage yourself based
on that cultural belief still?
>>MARTINEZ: Well, that's
a really good point.
And what I try to do is I ask
people to create subcultures
of wellness.
For example, let's say that
you have lied all your life,
and all of a sudden you
say, I want to be truthful.
And your friends
say you're a liar.
And you go to your friends, and
you say something that's true.
And they say, no, come on.
You always tell lies.
Those people are
going to keep you
within that sphere of
your archetype of a liar.
Now in a subculture of wellness,
you don't have a history.
And you talk to them.
They see what you're
saying as truth.
And if you say, I'm a truthful
person, that's really good.
I'm glad.
I like truthful people.
So they change the script.
But we're social beings.
We need people that
support our beliefs
and confirm our
goodness and confirm
whatever we're learning.
>>LISA: So this
abundance, does it
have an effect on
our physiology,
on wellness, and on longevity,
which you know so much about?
>>MARTINEZ: Yes, yes.
Let's say that you get
to a level of abundance
that either you
don't feel worthy,
or that you're dishonoring the
people where you came from.
That's going to be stressful.
It's going to be stressful.
You're going to be
in a chronic state
of cortisol and norepinephrine
and inflammatory kinds
of molecules.
And eventually, well,
that will have an effect.
>>LISA: Hmm.
And so you could create
an illness from abundance.
>>MARTINEZ: Yes, you could.
>>LISA: If you
don't really become
aware, first of
all, of all of this.
And once you do become
aware of it, what do you do?
>>MARTINEZ: Then when
you become aware,
you have to look at people
that you know who are out
of the pale within the family.
You need models.
And if you don't have
anybody in the family,
a well-known person, you have
to find a hero or heroine
to actually say, OK.
There's evidence that
this person made it
without getting sick.
That evidence, it
has a placebo effect.
It has a value to it.
And you begin to imitate
how that person lives.
And you begin to see that
they have different scripts,
and they support your abundance.
When you go to them with your
abundance, they support it.
They don't knock it.
They don't bring you
back into the pale.
>>LISA: Hmm.
What about culturally?
So there is an area,
they say the Midwest,
where there is a low amount
of iodine because of the lack
of exposure to the sea.
And that area has a large
incidence of thyroid disorders.
So is this a
cultural experience,
or is this something that
is centered around location?
>>MARTINEZ: Well,
the environment
is really important.
Iodine is very
important, for example.
Places where there's
not a lot of magnesium,
people have heart problems.
And so definitely the
environment and the nutrition
and the kinds of things,
vitamins and minerals,
are really very important.
That's necessary,
but not sufficient,
because you could have a place
where they have the iodine.
And you have this,
and they have that.
And they still have
thyroid problems.
>>LISA: Yeah, that person
moves to the ocean,
and they still have
the thyroid problems.
>>MARTINEZ: And they still
have thyroid problems.
Mind and body are
inseparable from the culture.
The way that I try
to explain it is
that the world has
infinite possibilities
of being interpreted.
And the cultural
will weave a fabric,
and our brain will read the
fabric, not what's out there.
>>LISA: So the mind and body
are inseparable, you just said.
>>MARTINEZ: Completely, and the
brain is culturally designed.
The immune system is
culturally designed.
When you, for example,
shame somebody
in an individualist
culture, they'll
have inflammatory molecules,
tumor necrosis factor
and other molecules.
Why?
The only way that
you can explain this
is that the immune system has
a biosymbolic interpretation.
Otherwise, how could
a word of your stupid,
how could that turn
into a biology?
Because it's biosymbolic.
It has a bioinformational field.
It has to because you have
a language, so it has to.
Animals don't have
a word to say, look.
That's poisonous.
So when we developed the
language and consciousness,
the immune system
went into that stage
also and became biosymbolic.
And that's very
hard to understand,
but I've seen it so
much in good research,
as well as with
patients, and also going
to different cultures.
>>LISA: Biosymbolic,
that's fascinating.
So the example I gave
earlier, maybe if somebody
were to win the
lottery, and we've
heard many times those
people, a large percentage,
lose all of it within the
first year and a half.
>>MARTINEZ: Yes.
>>LISA: This is
because of the fact
that they were never raised
with that environment
around having an
abundance of money?
>>MARTINEZ: Yes,
people that have
abundance are taught that
money is a natural thing.
Money works for you.
>>LISA: Just always there.
>>MARTINEZ: This
is a natural thing.
When you're in a
deprivation mode,
you learn the mode
of deprivation.
Then when you come out
of the deprivation mode,
you have to learn
non-deprivation.
And we don't do that.
We just make the money
and begin to get sick
or give it away to an accountant
who steals it or whatever
in order to come back to
that ceiling that keeps
you miserably comfortable.
>>LISA: Wow.
Wow.
You would actually attract an
accountant to steal your money.
>>MARTINEZ: Yeah.
>>LISA: Wouldn't you?
>>LISA: Fascinating.
So how do we raise the ceiling?
How do we get rid of this
cultural unconsciousness
and change those patterns if
we don't defect from the tribe?
>>MARTINEZ: Well, the first
thing is intellectual,
and then you have to work
it through existentially
and experientially.
The first thing is that
you know that there
are people who are
really bad, and they have
good things happen to them.
And you have good
people, and they
have bad things happen to them.
Well, it's not because of merit.
It's not that it is
meritorious that I
have this because I've earned
it, and I'm a good person.
You already have that
nature within you
of abundance of health,
wealth, and love.
If you begin to believe that,
and experiment with that,
and begin to see that
it's there, then when
it comes to you it's natural.
But you also have to
have the subcultures
to support the belief
system that you have.
Sometimes, children
will have hallucinations
that are things that
you can't explain.
They say, I saw this lady
that was talking to me,
and she looked like this.
And it's a
great-grandmother that he
never heard about or never saw.
Well, maybe some
things that they see--
and what they is they kill.
And they say, no,
no, darling, no, no.
You just made that
up in your head.
And then they kill it, and they
bring you back to the culture
where you're comfortable.
>>LISA: Mm-hmm, and
then they discount
any ability to be psychic, yes.
>>MARTINEZ: That's right, yeah.
>>LISA: So how do
you explain someone
like an Elon Musk
or someone who came
from a very difficult background
and becomes a bazillionaire?
>>MARTINEZ: Well, first,
you look at their health.
If their health is
good, then they're OK.
>>LISA: Really?
>>MARTINEZ: Yeah, that's the
first thing that I look at.
Or if you have a guru
who is morbidly obese
and is doing diets,
you have to live it.
[LAUGHTER]
You have to live it.
So if he's healthy, great.
And there are people.
There are outliers.
There are people that always
break away from the tribe,
and that's what's good,
that we have outliers.
For hundreds of
thousands of years,
because all the ice
came all the way down
to the middle of
Africa, nobody would
move because they
would call them
the ice monsters, till finally
some people, outliers, said,
well, we're going to go
fight the ice monsters.
And they found ice.
That's when civilization
began to really move.
So you have to have
outliers to break away
from the norms of the
tribe that are basically
the demons of disdain
and the demons of--
>>LISA: Imagination, even.
>>MARTINEZ: That's right, yes.
>>LISA: Right.
So you're saying the person
has to be healthy first.
So how much does this
mind-body relationship,
and as in your book that
you talk about this,
how much does it
affect our health?
You say diabetes is
something that's learned.
>>MARTINEZ: To a
certain degree, you
have a propensity for diabetes.
There's no question about that.
There's a propensity for the
metabolism of the glucose.
And if you're
overweight, you're going
to be blocking your cells.
All those things are mechanical.
But it's a propensity
to be expressed
based on what you eat, the
environment that you live,
but also the belief
systems that you have.
And I've seen quite a bit of
repressed anger in diabetes.
And repressed anger, there's a
lot of endorphin, high levels
of endorphin.
For example, when an animal
is dying of a violent death,
and they do an autopsy,
they'll find endorphins,
very, very high
levels of endorphins,
or a suicide that's
very aggressive,
and the endorphin
is the anesthetic,
so they won't feel the
bite of the lion, the prey.
So it's an anesthetic.
So if you're angry, and
you repress your anger,
or you're angry
chronically, the only way
that you can repress it
is with the endorphins.
And endorphins, there's
some research coming out
that it's showing
that endorphins,
when they're high
and chronic, affect
the metabolism of glucose.
So those are things.
But, for example,
righteous anger--
my mentor, George Solomon,
who called it psychoimmunology
at first and then
psychoimmunology,
he called it righteous anger.
Anger in the context when
innocence is being abused,
that's good for
the immune system.
>>LISA: Yeah-- it is?
>>MARTINEZ: It is good
for the immune system.
>>LISA: Wow.
>>MARTINEZ: But if you
take it out of context,
and you become an
angry person, then it's
bad for the immune system.
>>LISA: OK, so
anger could be used
to help us move into
action, and that releases
the right amount of endorphins.
But if it's suppressed, it
starts to destroy the system.
>>MARTINEZ: Yes, because
it's now chronic.
You have it within.
And what George Solomon found
was that many of the women
that he worked with, to find
out that rheumatoid arthritis is
not only the rheumatoid
factor, that it
has the psychological component,
he worked with many women.
But I'll give you an example of
what would exemplify the group.
Two sisters, one had
very intense distortions
and the ravages of the
illness, and the other one
was totally perfect.
Sisters, very close
DNA and so forth,
they both have been
sexually abused.
One, who was with high-intensity
rheumatoid arthritis
deterioration, would go see
her dad in the nursing home.
And her dad would
say, I want you
to tell me that you
love me, and she would.
And when she would come out,
she would have, of course,
inflammation, we know now.
She would be worse.
And then her rheumatologist
would say, no.
That's just the stress
of seeing your father.
It's not that.
It's the inflammation and
the shame that she felt,
which causes inflammation.
The other one was fine.
The other one, he
asked her, what's
your relationship with your dad?
And she said, I can't
wait for the SOB
to die so I can
spit on his grave.
Righteous anger, but she
wasn't an angry person.
Out of that context,
she was happy and fine.
But in that situation,
that man was a monster.
Well, it's a
conservation process
that we have in our
development of 150,000 years
as Homo sapiens, that
it's necessary to be
angry about some things
to protect innocence.
>>LISA: I understand now
what you're talking about.
Yeah, one internalized
it, and one had
that type of righteous anger.
>>MARTINEZ: Yes, yes.
>>LISA: Speaking
of righteous anger,
there are so many drugs that
are pushed on these, quote,
"illnesses," like ADD
and high blood pressure
and addictions and
other types of things
that they call disease.
Is this a matter
of us really being
pushed with these types of drugs
by pharmaceutical companies,
or are these really
legitimately chemical
dysfunctions in the body?
What's your opinion?
>>MARTINEZ: There's a
collective belief system--
pharmaceuticals, doctors,
families, teachers--
that it's an illness.
And I know all about the
dopamine and the nucleus
accumbens and all of that.
It's not a deficit, and
it's not a disorder.
It's an abundance
of curiosity that
needs to be treated,
needs to be helped.
>>LISA: You mean ADD and ADHD?
>>MARTINEZ: Yes,
it's not an illness.
It's an abundance of curiosity.
Why is it that they don't have
the attention deficit when
they're playing with a video
that they like for hours?
What happened to the dopamine?
>>LISA: Right, right.
>>MARTINEZ: Dopamine definitely
is involved, but it's not that.
I think it needs to be treated
as an abundance of curiosity.
And there are schools
that actually do that,
without medication.
So I would say medication
would be a very low percentage.
I'm not a physician, but I have
treated many, many patients,
and working with physicians,
that it's really not necessary
if you have the right treatment
and the right professionals who
are working with it.
>>LISA: You did a great
lecture about this.
I want you guys to
check this lecture out
that Dr. Martin Martinez is
talking about, ADD and ADHD.
>>MARTINEZ: We have created
illnesses based on marketing.
ADHD is not an illness.
ADHD is a marketing scheme.
I'm a neuropsychologist,
and I can tell you
that it's not an illness.
It's novelty learning.
It's a way of learning
that's different than what
you learn in the classrooms.
Addictions are not illnesses.
They are conduct disorders,
problems with will,
problems with self-esteem.
Addictions are not illnesses.
All these other things that
they talk about that, that this
is hat's wrong with you and
that's what's wrong with you,
it's a way--
blood pressure 120
over 80 was normal.
Now they want a larger market
now, so 110 over 70 is better.
And blood pressure
is not an illness.
It's only a risk factor.
Cholesterol is not an illness.
It's a risk factor.
When you talk about the
low-density lipoproteins,
the "bad" cholesterol,
it's not bad.
It's necessary.
What makes it bad is when you
have pro-inflammatory foods
is what makes it bad, not that
the low-density lipoprotein is
bad.
So it's all a marketing scheme.
You don't blame the physicians.
You can blame the
pharmaceuticals,
and you can blame the
markets that have set up
all these standards.
The cholesterol standards
were set up by corporations
and were set up by
members of boards
that were paid by corporations
to determine what is normal
and what is not
normal cholesterol.
There are centenarians,
and I work a lot
with centenarians,
people who live over 100.
Some of them have
high cholesterol.
And when you ask them,
what do your doctors have
to say about that, they
say, well, I don't know.
They're all dead.
[LAUGHTER]
>>LISA: So tell me about
biocognitive theory.
What exactly is that?
>>MARTINEZ:
Biocognitive is really--
I had to invent the word.
From biology, all
the things that
are biological, the immune
system, the nervous system,
and cognition is the
thoughts, including
spirituality,
because spirituality
requires the cognition.
So both of them
come in together.
At first, I didn't
bring the culture in.
It was just mind and
body, inseparable.
Then later, I brought
the culture in,
because I started
looking at other places
and other countries.
And, for example, in
Asia, the Asian countries
are collectivist countries.
Here we have an
individualist country.
If I say something to
you, and you're ashamed,
you are ashamed.
But if I say
something to an Asian,
it's a shaming of the
group or the shaming
of the country or the family.
That's what causes
the inflammation then.
So the immune system is
waiting for the culture
to tell it how it
needs to respond.
>>LISA: It's interesting.
You've brought up suicide
a couple of times here.
And I've learned in
the Asian culture
that if there is a
financial devastation,
that the man in
charge of the family,
there's been a high
incidence of suicide
amongst that person
that feels responsible.
And this is a cultural
epidemic that is happening
within certain areas of Asia.
Have you heard about this?
>>MARTINEZ: Yes.
Yes, yes, because they're
shaming the family.
And the shaming of the family
is the worst that you can do.
Shaming causes inflammation.
Inflammation is
related to depression.
So sometimes, they go
into a clinical depression
and commit suicide.
Depression is more
related, I think,
to inflammatory
kinds of molecules
than the serotonin model.
Serotonin model is not as
strong as it used to be.
>>LISA: So it's inflammatory
from our food supplies?
>>MARTINEZ: A lot are
from our emotions.
Shame is the strongest
indicator of--
>>LISA: Inflammation?
>>MARTINEZ: --of inflammation.
For example, people that
live with a lot of shame
will have illnesses
that are related to--
some are autoimmune.
And now there's some thinking
that inflammation can even
trigger autoimmune illnesses.
>>LISA: Oh, it's that
comes first, of course.
>>MARTINEZ: Yes, yes, because
it's confusing the system.
Inflammation is
something to be dealt
with when you have a particular
pathology in the tissue
or whatever.
But inflammation when
there's no need for it,
it just throws off
the whole system.
>>LISA: Mm-hmm.
Oh, yes, thus the
autoimmune epidemic.
You're talking about a
lot of epidemics here.
>>MARTINEZ: Yes.
>>LISA: This is very important.
It's the combination
between the biology
and the cognitive
function and the culture
is where you start to
look for the clues on how
to heal these things.
>>MARTINEZ: Yes.
>>LISA: Now you also mentioned--
so back to the suicide thing
really quickly-- that there
is a neurotransmitter that's
released right before the act of
the person killing themselves?
>>MARTINEZ: The endorphin.
>>LISA: Endorphin.
>>MARTINEZ: Yeah, the
endorphin is released in order
to reduce the pain.
It's an automatic process.
The prey, for example, there's
a deer, and there's a lion.
The prey after a
while will give up,
and you notice they'll
turn up like this.
And the lion bites.
And the body, automatically
from many, many hundreds
of thousands of years, will
shoot the endorphin out
in order to reduce the pain.
So that's what happens
also with anger.
Now, if you know you're
going to shoot yourself,
that's a lot of fear,
even though you know
you're going to shoot yourself.
>>LISA: Yes, it's a snap, right.
>>MARTINEZ: So you're
going to have endorphins.
>>LISA: How do you
prevent it is my question.
>>MARTINEZ: The suicide?
One of the things
about suicide is
that worthiness is a real
important component of suicide.
And one of the things that
I talked about that I wrote
an article about, Bourdain,
who was one of my heroes,
what happens is
that if you don't--
and it's not that he
didn't feel worthy.
But you get to a point where
you're not being self-caring.
If you're going
to kill yourself,
you're not self-caring.
So one of the
techniques that I use
is to let people know
that you love them.
Call somebody that you know.
And you tell them
that you love them,
while you don't have the
ability to love yourself.
And love has a
reciprocal component,
so it begins to bring
the person back.
But you have to practice this.
If you have suicidal tendency,
you have to practice.
Let me call such and
such and tell them
that I love them,
not to say goodbye,
but just to let them
know that I love them.
That gradually, indirectly,
brings back the self-caring so
that you don't want
to destroy yourself.
I'm overs--
>>LISA: Doing that as a
practice is important.
>>MARTINEZ: As a practice, yes.
>>LISA: You wrote an article
in the "Huff Post" about this--
>>MARTINEZ: Yes.
>>LISA: --which is great.
So the act of calling
someone and telling them
that you love them, what else?
What else could help
with something like that?
>>MARTINEZ: Well,
the first thing
is-- there was a study,
the biggest study that's
ever been done at Harvard.
77 years they've
been studying this.
And they looked at everything.
They looked at blood pressure.
And the factor that they
found that kept the person
within a certain level of
mental health and longevity
was that that person had
someone that they could
count on when they needed them.
Powerful factor.
>>LISA: 77 years, hmm.
>>MARTINEZ: Yes, and
sometimes people,
whether it's true or not--
if they're delusional,
of course, then there's
no reasoning there.
But sometimes,
people get to a point
that they really don't think
that anybody loves them.
And you would ask, well,
why, these people that
are so well known, that are
loved all over the world,
and they go back to their
hotel, and they kill themselves?
>>LISA: That have
brands about positivity
and have lifestyles
that one would want.
>>MARTINEZ: And
one of the things
that I've found in working
with some of these people
is that let's say
you have a concert.
And 50,000 people go to a
concert, and you feel great.
Your adrenaline is going.
It's fine, and you know
those people love you.
Then you go back to your
private hotel by yourself.
You don't have anybody
to share it with,
anybody that means
something to you.
It's always good to travel
with people that love you.
>>LISA: Yeah, that's
true, or at least
have them close by on the phone.
>>MARTINEZ: Have them
close by or call them.
>>LISA: What do you think
about the term mental illness?
Mental illness, we
hear this all the time,
and a lot is attributed
to mental illness.
So we have to solve mental--
what do you feel about it?
>>MARTINEZ: There's no such
thing as mental illness.
There's mind-body illness,
but there's no illness
that doesn't affect the body.
And there's no illness
that doesn't affect
the mind or the cognition.
And in conventional
medicine, if we
can't find anything
clinically wrong
and you have some symptoms, then
you need to see a psychiatrist.
>>LISA: Right, OK.
>>MARTINEZ: And by the way,
many of these people that commit
suicide are not mentally ill--
>>LISA: Right, yeah.
>>MARTINEZ: --or
not even depressed.
So it's an existential
process that's going on there.
>>LISA: Meaning?
>>MARTINEZ: Meaning
the meaning of life,
the meaning of themselves, the
meaning of what am I doing.
Sometimes, they
feel that they've
done everything possible.
Some of these people
have done things
that you wouldn't
do in 10 lives.
So the next thing
is, because they're
living on this adrenaline,
OK, so what's my next high?
Nothing else.
>>LISA: Right, right.
>>MARTINEZ: And they give up.
>>LISA: Yeah, I fear that
sometimes around our younger
culture that's so addicted
to the dopamine hits
from the gaming
and the technology
and so forth that
there is not going
to be enough in
their 40s, 50s, 60s,
to stimulate that level
of instant gratification.
I wonder what's going to happen
culturally to this generation.
>>MARTINEZ: Well, it's very
interesting because what
I call the i-self that
we're creating, that we text
and everything-- if I
look at you, and I smile,
and you smile back, we'll
have oxytocin and endorphins
and other things coming out.
But if you're doing a video, or
if you're talking to somebody,
and you see the face,
and they're smiling,
there's no oxytocin.
The immune system can
tell the difference,
and the endocrine system.
So you can't fool mother
nature, as they say.
>>LISA: Interesting, so you
have to have more personal face
time.
>>MARTINEZ: Yes, face time.
>>LISA: Not on FaceTime here.
>>MARTINEZ: Not on FaceTime,
but the real, exactly.
>>LISA: Oh, so a smile on
a camera through FaceTime
isn't the same thing?
>>MARTINEZ: No.
No, it's not.
>>LISA: It doesn't
share the oxytocin?
>>MARTINEZ: No, and it
might be the mirror neurons.
They're beginning to study that.
But, for example,
many people can see--
you're looking at
a television show,
and you can tell if it's
live or if it's not.
There's some sense.
>>LISA: Energy, yes.
>>MARTINEZ: Something happens
out of the same thing here.
And it's been tested.
Actually, they do the FaceTime,
and it doesn't happen.
>>LISA: Really?
>>MARTINEZ: Because
it's an i-self.
It's not self.
>>LISA: Huh.
So that screen really limits--
>>MARTINEZ: Yes, yes.
>>LISA: --neurotransmitters?
>>MARTINEZ: Yes, and
the interesting thing
is that you're having fun.
You feel good about it, but
it's not responding to the way
that it should.
And maybe another 10,000
years, maybe the immune system
and nervous system
will adjust to that.
But right now, it hasn't.
I hope it doesn't.
>>LISA: Well, I mean,
what if you have friends
that you can't maybe see, or are
in other states and so forth,
that you can still talk
to people on the street
or have conversations
with people in line
at the grocery store?
Would that give you the
same amount of connection?
>>MARTINEZ: It helps, yes.
>>LISA: It does help.
>>MARTINEZ: You have to have
the little tribe, the community.
And rituals are really,
really important--
>>LISA: OK, let's
talk about that.
>>MARTINEZ:
--especially when you're
ending a relationship,
when you've
been with unrequited love.
Someone no longer loves you.
You don't go look
for somebody else.
You don't go look for drugs.
You don't go look for porno.
You look for rituals,
self-caring rituals,
finding a little restaurant
where they treat you well,
preparing a meal for yourself,
going for a walk to commune
with nature.
And that sounds really very
trite and very magical,
but it's true.
You have immunological changes
when you go into the rituals.
We're built that way.
It's in our DNA to have rituals.
>>LISA: I can see that.
But what's the difference
between a ritual and a routine?
>>MARTINEZ: The
routine is something
you do for a function, to
take a shower to smell good,
stay clean.
A ritual is something
that you venerate.
You bring it higher.
You go for a walk to
commune with nature
or you have meals with a
family without television.
Those are the rituals.
>>LISA: That have meaning.
>>MARTINEZ: That have meaning,
even a funeral is a ritual.
A wedding is a ritual.
A birthdays is a ritual.
But the important thing
is to eat with family
without any kind of intervention
with the digital world.
>>LISA: A lost art, but it
does have a lot of benefits.
I mean, they've done a lot of
studies on the family dinner.
>>MARTINEZ: Oh, yes,
very much, very much.
There was a study actually
that looked at alcoholics.
And if you have parents
who are alcoholics,
your propensity is very high.
And they looked at the
outliers, the ones who
didn't become
alcoholics, although they
had alcoholic parents,
and drank socially.
And they found
that the factor was
that although the
parents were alcoholics,
they would still
break bread together
without any television.
They would still
have the dinners,
even though they may
have been a little drunk.
But they still had the dinners.
It has a cohesive quality
to it that's very important.
>>LISA: That is interesting.
You just described my life.
My father came back from
Vietnam with, you know,
horrible issues with alcohol
because he was anaesthetising.
>>MARTINEZ: PTSD?
>>LISA: Yes.
And because of his
exposure to Agent Orange
and had all these chemical
issues, and yet my mom
still tried to keep it together
with these horrible crockpot
meals she would make.
But they were still--
>>MARTINEZ: But you
kept it cohesive,
even though it
wasn't the greatest.
>>LISA: But I
didn't wind up being
an alcoholic, thank
God, probably because
of those horrible
crockpot meals.
>>MARTINEZ: That's right.
That's right.
It just reduces the intensity of
whatever pathology is going on.
>>LISA: Mm-hmm, that's
very interesting.
It's so fascinating that you're
able to study all of this
and learn all of this.
And the more that you learn,
it helps not sabotage or repeat
these different
types of patterns.
>>MARTINEZ: And it's
a science of hope,
but with good evidence.
>>LISA: A science of
hope, I love that.
>>MARTINEZ: You're not
sentenced to an illness.
You're not sentenced
to live your life
like your parents did, but you
have to do something about it.
It's not just in your head.
It's not just affirmations.
It's actually living it
and creating evidence.
>>LISA: There's actually a clip
here, talking about rituals.
Dr. Martinez is going
to talk about that.
>>MARTINEZ: I went to Cuba.
They have quite a few
centenarians there.
And I interviewed this lady.
And I asked her,
so what do you--
instead of biasing
it, I was doing a kind
of ethnographic kind of thing.
I said, what do you do
on a regular basis that
has meaning for you?
It's another way of saying,
do you have a ritual?
And she said, oh, yes.
I have a shot of rum
before I go to sleep.
And I thought, oh, it's
got to be the Cuban
Bacardi or the Cuban rum.
And then I went to another one,
and he said, I have a cigar.
Oh, it must be the Cuban--
it's the ritual.
They all have rituals.
So I would suggest that one of
the causes of health that you
can start is create a ritual.
Elevate it to a level
where you can actually
have a devotional component
to it, that it's important.
And you will see
how things begin
to change to a certain degree.
The other thing about
the causes of health
is that, for at
least 150,000 years,
we've been refining the system.
The immune system is much
more sophisticated now
than it was a million years ago.
There were no T cells
a million years ago.
Now we have T cells.
So you don't want to
live back in the caves.
You don't want to
go back to nature,
because you would live
31 years in those days.
And there was no sanitary paper
or toothbrushes and paste.
So you were not as attractive,
although in those days,
that was attractive.
[LAUGHTER]
So see how I get a little
Darwinian, too, sometimes?
So, anyway, we've been
defining our tools.
And in at least 150,000
years, it's contextual.
The best tool to
be around children
is the archetype of the
father or the mother.
That's the best.
>>LISA: All right,
so in that clip,
you talked about archetypes.
Can you tell us a
little bit about that?
>>MARTINEZ: Archetypes, you
can look at them as tools.
With 150,000 years
of Homo sapiens,
there's a trial and error.
OK, this tool works well here.
It doesn't work well there.
And your biology
will adjust to that.
OK, it works here.
You get a hammer.
You don't want to use
a hammer for a screw.
You don't want to hammer with
the handle of a screwdriver.
So what happens
with the archetypes?
You're the father.
You come home to children,
and you're the lover.
That's not the right archetype.
After hundreds of
thousands of years,
the best archetype for
the man with the children
is the father, with
the woman, the mother.
And especially with
CEOs, visionary,
but when you get home, you
don't want to be a visionary.
You want to be a
father or a partner,
or a mother or a partner.
And that's one of the things
that I work with CEOs.
In many of these major
companies, 75% of them
have gastrointestinal problems.
>>LISA: Hmm, because
they come home,
and they're still the CEO?
>>MARTINEZ: Yes.
>>LISA: And they're
not the partner?
>>MARTINEZ: They're
not the partner.
>>LISA: Mm-hmm.
>>MARTINEZ: And it's like
using this the screwdriver.
It'll break.
>>LISA: Got it.
>>MARTINEZ: The system is set up
for this context, that context.
If you break it--
that's what happened
with Steve Jobs.
He was a visionary, my hero,
but he couldn't break from that.
He just didn't know
how to break from it.
>>LISA: Adapt to life.
>>MARTINEZ: Yes, he
used Zen Buddhism
for the Apple products, but
not for himself as much.
>>LISA: Mm-hmm.
So people take their
work home with them,
or they stay in the
same role in that way.
What is the ideal archetype
for when you are growing up?
What do you want to have
as the mother, the father?
And what about same-sex
couples and things like that?
Do they take on different roles?
Tell me about that.
>>MARTINEZ: Yes, I think so.
Even same-sex couples can
have more, like, the fatherly
and the motherly in the
sense of teaching ways.
But you don't want to
be your child's friend.
The archetype of the friend, no.
You want to have a
father who's friendly
and a mother who's
friendly, but not the friend
only, because they need a
mother, not just a friend.
And that's very, very important.
Or they need a
father or a figure
that they can see that
this person is my friend,
but is not just my friend.
I can go to them and ask
more than I ask my friends.
>>LISA: So you can still be
friends with your children?
>>MARTINEZ: Yeah, of course.
>>LISA: Of course, and
sometimes be best friends,
but you maintain the
role as the parent
as the predominant relationship.
>>MARTINEZ: Yes.
I'm your father, and
I'm your best friend.
But when I need
to be your father,
then I shoot out of the best
friend, and I'm your father.
No, you can't do this.
I'm sorry.
But you're my best friend.
Yes, but I'm your father.
>>LISA: Yeah, so let's
talk a little bit
about this self-compassion
and over-caring for others.
This is such an
interesting topic
that you cover on how we can
be over-caring for people,
people-pleasing, and to the
point where we are not taking
care of ourselves any longer.
>>MARTINEZ: Well, if you
divide all the illnesses,
I think you can divide
all the illnesses
into under-immunity,
hyper or over-immunity,
and auto-immunity.
So the immune system is
not working strong enough.
It's self-destroying
or working too much.
>>LISA: Two different things.
>>MARTINEZ: Yes.
>>LISA: Not strong enough
or destroying itself.
>>MARTINEZ: Or destroying
it, or, for example,
under-immunity, there's a
correlation, not a cause,
a correlation, with
infections, cancer,
things that the immune
system can't take care of.
Autoimmune, of course, is
related to the inflammation,
shaming, and things like that.
And, of course, you have MS, and
you have rheumatoid arthritis
and fibromyalgia.
Hyperimmunity is
really, for example,
allergies are hyperimmunity.
Overreacting, the immune
system is overreacting
to something that is
like a pathogen that
is not there, or not
necessarily there.
And you can retrain
yourself out of any kind
of allergy, or most allergies,
with professional help.
>>LISA: Wow, really?
>>MARTINEZ: Yeah.
So going back to your
question on the--
>>LISA: Over-caring.
>>MARTINEZ: Sometimes, I
go over, but I come back.
>>LISA: No, that
makes sense, though.
It's an answer to my
question, but go ahead.
>>MARTINEZ: So hat happens
with the caretakers
is that one of the
causes of health
is having good
self-caring boundaries.
You don't have that.
What happens is
that you're going
to have an under-immunity.
You're doing and doing
and doing and doing,
and you're not replenishing.
You're not taking
care of yourself.
My aunt died of colon cancer.
And that wasn't what caused
it, but her personality
was that way.
She didn't want
to upset anybody.
And when I took her to the
hospital, she was dying.
She called me out of her room.
I said, what's the matter?
Are you OK?
Ask the ambulance driver
if he's had dinner.
And she's dying.
And you would say, this is
a saint, and that's good.
But wait till you
die to be canonized.
Don't become a saint
when you're alive.
Have limits.
You have empathy fatigue.
It looks just like
burnout, but it's not.
>>LISA: Well, this is very
common amongst caregivers
in our Baby Boomer
generation who are caring now
for their spouses or
loved ones or adult
children who are caring for
aging parents that are ill.
It can be very fatiguing
on the entire situation.
And they always say, oh,
take care of yourself.
Do something for yourself,
but you can't when
your parent is dying.
>>MARTINEZ: It's very difficult.
>>LISA: It is.
>>MARTINEZ: Yes, yes, and
you have to find some help.
You have to have
people that help you.
And also you feel guilty
for feeling resentment.
>>LISA: It feels so insensitive.
>>MARTINEZ: So it's
a bad situation.
>>LISA: Give us some
solutions, Dr. Mario.
>>MARTINEZ: Well,
I think number one
is to be aware that
that's happening
and to remember this
little example that I
use when you're flying.
And they tell you
about the mask.
When does the pressure change?
You breathe first and then
the child or the disabled,
because otherwise you pass
out, and you can't help.
That's the same thing.
So the first thing
to do is if you
don't take care of
yourself, you're
not going to be
able to take care
of that person, number one.
And number two is
that in many cases,
people in those situations
are martyrs in the sense
that I can do it all.
They don't ask for help.
And I've had patients who tell
me, I'm taking care of my mom.
She's all alone, and I
got to take care of--
do you have any siblings?
Yes, there are six of us.
Can they help?
No, no, they can't.
They're very busy.
Well, those are examples of the
martyr, that I can do it all,
and I don't need anybody.
And then they have
empathy fatigue,
and they have all
kinds of problems.
And they get sick.
Sometimes, they even
die before the person
they're taking care of.
>>LISA: Yes, you hear
about this all the time.
>>MARTINEZ: Yes.
>>LISA: I mean, it begs
the question, though.
Why is our older
generation so ill?
I mean, we see it
with health care.
We see the burden on society.
Why are so many people so ill,
where they drain their savings
in end-of-life care?
>>MARTINEZ: Well, the way I
look at it is with centenarians.
My idea is that
good science looks
at what works and then
creates theories about it,
not what doesn't work.
And when I looked at
centenarians, hundreds of them,
for years, over 20 years, I
find that genetics is about 20%.
How they live and
the environments
that they live in--
>>LISA: Is the rest?
>>MARTINEZ: --is really
the major factor.
>>LISA: What are some
other traits or traditions
that these centenarians
do that have
kept them so healthy at
a very, very old age?
>>MARTINEZ: What my mentor
called healthy narcissism.
>>LISA: OK.
>>MARTINEZ: They
love themselves.
They think everybody loves them.
And the system can't
tell the difference
whether you believe it or not.
I mean, look at the opposite.
All these people that are
so famous, rock stars,
they have all these
people love them.
They don't believe it.
It doesn't work.
I went to Cuba to
interview a centenarian,
and they had a little
cocktail party for him later.
And there were some
women there and some men.
And he walks up to
me, and he says,
have you noticed how these
women are looking at me?
They love me.
But here's the
healthy narcissism.
He says, but have you noticed
how beautiful they are?
Inclusive narcissism,
that's the difference.
>>LISA: So it's not a
dirty old man thing.
>>MARTINEZ: No, no, no.
The narcissist would
say, since they love me,
then I'm going to
go take advantage.
He was saying, let me
share my-- they love me.
Look how beautiful they are.
You see?
It's inclusive.
And that is one of
the causes of health.
They have that.
What are we taught
in our society?
Pseudo-humbleness, the little
girl goes to the mother
and says, Mommy,
look how pretty I am.
No, no, darling,
you don't say that.
You don't say you're pretty.
You wait till they tell
you, and then you deny it.
So then how can you buy
anything good about yourself?
In Uruguay, where I was
living, they kid around,
but I don't think they do it.
It's a cultural thing.
They say, we forgive
everything except success.
And they're number one is
suicide in South America.
>>LISA: Oh, my goodness.
>>MARTINEZ: Because of that--
>>LISA: We don't
forgive success.
>>MARTINEZ: We don't
I have a friend out
there who bought a car,
and he bought a gray car.
He said, I want it to be gray
so people won't notice it.
If you do really well,
then they bring you down.
So you can't-- the Scandinavians
have a problem with that, too,
that everybody
should be the same.
In fact, you're not the same.
You're worse than
everybody else.
And when I work with
corporations in Scandinavia
and different countries,
I have to teach
them to come out of
that culture and come up
with a hybrid leadership.
>>LISA: And maybe raise
the entire culture--
>>MARTINEZ: Exactly.
>>LISA: --if it's
a small enough one
that you could start to raise.
Have you seen that work?
>>MARTINEZ: Yes, yes, yes,
because what we do is we
say we want equality
of excellence.
>>LISA: Yes, that would be good.
>>MARTINEZ: They still
stay equal, but excellent.
>>LISA: That would be very good.
>>MARTINEZ: So you
respect the culture,
but you kind of enhance the--
>>LISA: So you've seen it work.
But what would you
suggest as an exercise
to maybe you're wanting to
raise your financial ceiling,
your healthy abundance level?
Can you teach us something?
>>MARTINEZ: Yes.
First, look at who
taught you not abundance.
Who taught you deprivation,
not by saying it,
but by watching it?
Deprivation in the
house, or who taught
you to save for a rainy day?
You're telling the brain,
save for a rainy day.
>>LISA: All of those
colloquialisms.
>>MARTINEZ: So you're
saving for a rainy day.
And when you save it,
the rainy day comes.
It's all set up.
>>LISA: Money doesn't
grow on trees.
>>MARTINEZ: Money doesn't grow
on trees, all those things.
And there's a deprivation
model, so you learn that.
>>LISA: Yikes.
>>MARTINEZ: And then you look
at the outliers who didn't
buy that within the pale.
You begin to imitate them.
And you begin to affirm
things like, for example, I
can become wealthy.
But then affirmation
alone doesn't work.
You pay attention to the body.
You're going to feel tense
because the body says, no.
No, you can't.
Then go back to a memory.
They're all archived.
And you say, when
did I feel abundant?
When did I make a little
money that I felt abundant?
How does that feel?
Then you have an archive
of evidence of success.
Then for the rest
of the day, you
do things that are
compatible with you
having abundance in your life,
small things, little things.
And you'll see how you
start breaking some
of the old scripts that say--
I had a patient
who I saw him once.
And he was making about $300,000
a year, and he owed $350.
I didn't help him very much.
He didn't see me very long.
I saw him 10 years later.
He was making $800,000,
and he owed $900,000.
So you work to pay bills
or you work to survive.
And those models need to
be broken out of the pale.
You've got to live
beyond the pale.
And then allow the
culture to criticize you.
Give them permission
to not like you.
>>LISA: So you're saying be
OK with feeling uncomfortable
and be OK with
breaking the patterns.
Is that what you're saying?
>>MARTINEZ: Yes, but
also finding evidence
that you are that.
If you say I'm a good person,
and you don't have evidence,
or your evidence evidence
is you're not a good person,
affirmations aren't
going to work.
They will make you tense.
But if you say, when
was I good in my life--
oh, I remember 10
years ago, I did this.
Bring the memory
back and embody it.
Embodying is really important.
And then make a commitment.
What can I do today
to have evidence
that I'm a good person?
See, neural maps don't
change in the brain
unless you give it evidence.
Cognition alone won't change it.
>>LISA: Well, let's go
back to the model of debt.
You know, you look
at society, and you
look at how much we are
marketed to be in debt.
>>MARTINEZ: To live beyond
your means, the American way.
>>LISA: Yes.
>>MARTINEZ: Yeah, so then
you're going to have a problem.
>>LISA: Yes, so how do you
break that cultural norm,
that societal norm?
>>MARTINEZ: By looking at
the things that really matter
in your life, the rituals.
The rituals, most
of them are free.
I went through a
bankruptcy many years ago,
and I was accumulating
everything, including love.
And then when I realized that
the things that matter in life
are not that
important, it was over.
I didn't have to achieve
for those things anymore.
I would achieve for
quality of life.
And everything came
back, but differently.
I don't buy $100,000
paintings anymore.
I don't drive a Porsche anymore
because I don't need to.
>>LISA: You don't need to.
>>MARTINEZ: Yeah.
>>LISA: And you said
you were acquiring love.
>>MARTINEZ: Yes.
>>LISA: What do you mean?
>>MARTINEZ: Friends, and I
would take them out to dinner,
and I would pay for everything.
And all those friends, when I
lost all the money, were gone.
So those are not friends.
Those are people
that you're buying.
>>LISA: And now how do you live?
>>MARTINEZ: Very comfortably.
I cook quite a bit.
And when I cook by myself, I
have candles, Gregorian music,
because here's another thing.
People will say,
oh, just for me?
I'm not going to cook for me.
I'll just have something quick.
Would you do it
for somebody else?
Oh, yes, I would,
but not for me.
You go to a restaurant,
and you say one.
Only one?
Yeah, how many do you want?
And they say, no problem.
Is there a problem?
You see, it's already
set up that way.
So the individual is
not valued as much
as a group in that
sense, even though we
have an individualist culture.
Why would somebody
say, only one?
They try to put you at the
bar or give you a bad table.
So how can you
feel good if that's
how the culture treats you?
>>LISA: Right, no, that
makes a lot of sense,
but it's based on
the tribe again.
>>MARTINEZ: Yeah, on the tribe.
>>LISA: Where's your tribe?
Where's your tribe?
>>MARTINEZ: Yeah, that's right.
And
>>LISA: If you try to
individuate from the tribe,
you have to have all of
these great rituals in place.
>>MARTINEZ: Yes.
>>LISA: I love the idea
of cooking for yourself
and playing the music.
I cook for myself when I
sit in front of my computer.
>>MARTINEZ: No, no, no i-self.
It is so tempting because
it's so entertaining.
But you'll find that when you
begin to entertain yourself,
that you really are a
very interesting person.
>>LISA: So do you
go to the airport
and sit and wait for your plane?
Do you play on your phone?
>>MARTINEZ: No.
>>LISA: Didn't think so.
>>MARTINEZ: No, now I'm writing.
>>LISA: Now you're writing.
>>MARTINEZ: I'm
writing a new book.
>>LISA: That's a good one.
>>MARTINEZ: Yeah.
>>LISA: How much do you think
laughter keeps us young?
>>MARTINEZ: Oh, it's
really important.
Laughter, it's actually a
dilator, a vascular dilator.
>>LISA: Oh, really?
>>MARTINEZ: Some cardiologists
are working with laughter now.
The Japanese use
laughter therapeutically.
Not only, I'm not
saying just laughter
if you have a heart problem.
But it's an enhancer
because it's a dilator.
And you have all
kinds of good hormones
that are released, and
the oxytocin again.
Why would you have a dilation
of the cardiovascular system
when you're laughing?
You need more, if
it's a belly laughter.
Now this is called
the Duchenne laughter.
The real laughter is
the one that you get--
the social laughter, it's the
laughter from here, nothing
there.
When you hear the laughter
that's contagious, that's good.
that's almost annoying,
it's social laughter.
It's not real.
>>LISA: Right, but when you
hear the belly laugh of someone,
you look, and you
laugh because of it.
Have you ever seen the laughing
video-- laughter therapy?
>>MARTINEZ: It's contagious.
>>LISA: Yes, it's
very contagious.
>>MARTINEZ: It's like yawning.
>>LISA: And how much does humor
play a role in our healing,
in our health?
>>MARTINEZ: Well,
centenarians have a great way
to deal with it.
First, it dilates your
cardiovascular system.
But they laugh at themselves.
They have the ability
to laugh at themselves.
When something happens,
if they make a mistake,
they laugh at themselves
because they made a mistake.
But they also see
humor in things
that people don't
even see the humor.
And they function in a way
where when they wake up
in the morning, they're
trying to figure out
what's going to be funny
for them in their lives.
It's like they anticipate
things to be doing well.
And they don't take
themselves very seriously.
That's another thing.
>>LISA: That's a biggie.
>>MARTINEZ: They don't take
themselves very seriously.
And some of them are very
wealthy and very well known
and so forth.
And Oscar Niemeyer,
the architect
who designed Brasilia, he
died at 107, I believe.
I don't remember.
And he would always have fun.
But they broke bread.
That's another thing, when
you're breaking bread,
is to have fun.
>>LISA: You're laughing, yeah.
>>MARTINEZ: You're laughing
and having a good time
and remembering.
Another thing, learning
how to mourn without dying,
very important.
>>LISA: What is that?
>>MARTINEZ: What that means
is that many centenarians lose
their children.
They lose their families.
And what they do
is they celebrate
having known the person.
That's how they mourn,
And then they talk about the
person and the good things
that happen to them.
It doesn't mean that
they're overwriting it.
They feel the sadness, but they
feel a tremendous contentment
that they had the honor
of knowing that person.
That's what I did with
my mother when she died.
And I took my kids to dinner.
And I said, we're going
to talk about her,
and we're going to
celebrate knowing her.
>>LISA: Her life, yeah.
>>MARTINEZ: And it
wasn't morbid at all.
It was really a sadness
with a sweetness to it.
And that's a really
good way to mourn.
Laughter, we had
a lot of laughter.
So laughter, again, is really a
good antidote for these things.
>>LISA: Did some of
these centenarians
watch their children die?
>>MARTINEZ: Yes.
>>LISA: As adults?
One of them told me a
joke that's a little sick.
But a centenarian told
me, so I'll tell you.
He said that this
couple, centenarians,
go to a marriage counselor.
He's 102.
She's 100.
And they say, Doctor,
we want a divorce.
A divorce after 70 years?
No, no, 80 years
we've been together.
But, no, no, you can't.
So he tries to talk
them out of it.
Well, what is it?
They said, no, look.
We've planned it, and
we've thought about it.
And we thought, why don't
we do it after the kids die?
[LAUGHTER]
>>LISA: That is pretty morbid.
>>MARTINEZ: It's true.
I mean, it's morbid, but
it's a totally different way
of looking at the world.
>>LISA: To live
beyond your children.
>>MARTINEZ: Your children, yes.
>>LISA: That is a very different
way of looking at the world.
>>MARTINEZ: Since
it's not genetics.
>>LISA: It's not cultural.
>>MARTINEZ: You have
to prepare yourself,
but you have to
mourn without dying.
And you have to end
an unrequited love
without getting sick.
That's very important.
>>LISA: That's against
the cultural norm as well.
>>MARTINEZ: Yes, yes.
>>LISA: But I see
how you're looking
at everything differently.
>>MARTINEZ: Yes.
>>LISA: Wonderful.
Thank you.
>>MARTINEZ: You're welcome.
>>LISA: I always like
to ask my guests, what
is your biggest why as to
why you do what you do?
>>MARTINEZ: Why?
To find meaning in things, to
find meaning in what I'm doing,
to find meaning in
what I'm doing here,
and to actually explore more
and more that we're not here
just by accident.
We're not just a
Darwinian accident
that some chemicals
got together,
and just by accident we--
I think meaning is more
important than passing on
of the genes.
And there's something
very interesting.
They call it the
grandmother effect.
Most animals will die
or start getting sick
or start looking older after
they don't reproduce anymore,
except the killer
whale and human beings,
because they have the
grandmother effect.
The killer whale, after she
can't reproduce anymore,
she'll still take the
pups and teach them where
they need to go for the food.
And the grandparents
will do that.
Now the grandfathers
would do the same thing.
But I think that you can
trick the immune system
by being creative.
You don't have to
create children.
You can create projects.
You can create things.
And that's what
centenarians are.
I saked a 103-year-old
man, so what
do you want to do
for the next year?
He said, oh, I'm
learning German.
>>LISA: Ah, always
learning, lifelong learner.
>>MARTINEZ: So getting
back to your question,
the why is the meaning
concept of life.
>>LISA: That's beautiful.
Well, thank you for showing us--
>>MARTINEZ: Thank you.
>>LISA: --what it means
to find meaning in things
and how to kind of
decode the mind-body code
through looking at
the cultural belief
and finding your true
awareness in all of this.
>>MARTINEZ: Thank you.
>>LISA: Thank you so much.
>>MARTINEZ: A pleasure.
>>LISA: If you would like to
watch more of my interview
with Dr. Mario Martinez,
please check out
the additional "Inspiration"
interviews on Gaia.
I am Lisa Garr.
And until next time, I
invite you to stay aware.
[MUSIC PLAYING]